Embedding Inferred JML Contracts in Java Bytecode
and OpenAPI Specifications
Anonymous Authors
Affiliation withheld for double-anonymous review
Abstract--Consumers of compiled Java libraries and remote
REST services rarely have the source code, which makes auto-
matically inferred Java Modeling Language (JML) specifications
unavailable to the consumers that would benefit from them:
test generators, IDEs, verifiers, and large language models
reading APIs at runtime. We propose a uniform mechanism
for distributing inferred JML contracts: a runtime-retained
annotation, @JmlSpecs, written into class-file attributes by an
ASM-based embedder, plus a parallel OpenAPI 3.x extension
family (x-jml-*) for service boundaries. We evaluate the
embedder on six real-world Java libraries (Commons Lang,
IO, and Math, Guava, jOOL, and Vavr; 39,268 methods) with
synthetic specifications and on a real-inferred-specs corpus of
22,881 specs across the same six libraries' source trees. The
OpenAPI extension is exercised against the reference parser
swagger-parser 2.1.x. We measure 100.0% lossless roundtrip
across all thirteen library-regime runs; 4.80­6.97% bytecode-size
overhead on synthetic specs and 4.63­10.20% on real inferred
specs; embedding throughput 6,000­34,000 methods/second and
reading throughput 68,000­334,000 methods/second. A format-
optimisation step (single packed annotation per method, default-
omission, and a twelve-token dictionary) reduces byte overhead
by 31% on real inference and 48­55% on synthetic specs over
a per-clause baseline. A negative test confirms that embedded
classes load correctly in JVMs that have no awareness of the
annotation type. Any existing JAR can be enriched in place, with
no build-toolchain changes.
Index Terms--JML, Java bytecode, ASM, OpenAPI, specifica-
tion distribution, runtime annotations, software contracts
I. INTRODUCTION
Recent work has shown that automatically inferred Java
Modeling Language (JML) specifications materially improve
LLM-generated unit tests on real-world Java code [1]. That re-
sult, and others like it on inferred specifications for verification
and tooling, share an unstated assumption: the consumer of the
specifications -- the test generator, the IDE, the verifier, the
language model reading the API at inference time -- has access
to the same source tree the inferrer ran over. The assumption
is rarely satisfied in practice. Java libraries are distributed as
JAR files; REST endpoints expose only their HTTP signature;
gRPC services expose only their protobuf descriptors. Source
code is the exception, not the norm.
The conceptual question of whether specifications should be
transported alongside compiled artefacts has a long history [2]­
[4]. The practical question is whether the standard toolchain
Replication package (embedder/extractor source, JSON Schema, measure-
ment logs, reproduction scripts): https://anonymous.4open.science/r/jml-i
nferrer-anon during review; non-anonymous DOI-archived release in the
camera-ready version.
can be made to carry them without modification. In this paper,
we propose and evaluate a uniform mechanism for distributing
inferred JML contracts in compiled Java libraries and in REST
service interfaces: a runtime-retained annotation written into
class-file attributes by an ASM-based embedder, plus a parallel
OpenAPI 3.x extension family for service boundaries.
We address the following research questions:
· RQ1. Can inferred JML contracts be embedded in
compiled Java artefacts and reproduced losslessly from
the embedded bytes, with no source-code dependency?
· RQ2. What is the bytecode-size overhead of the embed-
ding, and how does it scale across libraries of different
shapes (utility code, I/O abstractions, generics-heavy
collections)?
· RQ3. Which format-design choices most reduce that
overhead -- a single packed annotation per method,
default-omission of the dominant clause, a learned token
dictionary, per-spec compression -- and what is the per-
choice impact on real inferred specs versus synthetic
specs?
· RQ4. Is the embedding and reading throughput sufficient
to support per-pull-request continuous-integration work-
flows on production-scale libraries?
· RQ5. Does an OpenAPI extension family conform
to OpenAPI 3.x's extension rule, roundtrip losslessly
through a reader/writer pair, and survive the canonical
swagger-parser unchanged?
We evaluate the bytecode side empirically on six real-
world Java libraries (Commons Lang, IO, and Math, Guava,
jOOL, and Vavr; 39,268 methods) and the inferrer-to-embedder
pipeline on real inferred specs across all six (22,881 specs).
The OpenAPI side is established by construction against
OpenAPI 3.x's x-* extension rule and empirically by
parsing a document carrying every x-jml-* key through
swagger-parser 2.1.x and verifying that all five keys, value
lists, and the signals clause's nested objects are preserved.
Table I summarises the findings: 100.0% lossless roundtrip on
every library-regime run; 4.80­6.97% bytecode overhead under
synthetic specs and 4.63­10.20% under real inferred specs;
a format-optimisation step reduces overhead by 31% on real
inference and 48­55% on synthetic; embedding throughput
is 6,000­34,000 m/s, with reading throughput an order of
magnitude higher.
Contributions. In summary, this paper makes the following
contributions:
· A Java annotation type, @JmlSpec, repeatable per
clause, written by an ASM-based embedder into class-
file RuntimeVisibleAnnotations attributes, from
which reflection or any class-file reader recovers the
embedded specification.
· An OpenAPI 3.x extension family (x-jml-requires,
x-jml-ensures, x-jml-assignable,
x-jml-signals, x-jml-invariant) carried
per-operation and per-schema, conformant with the
OpenAPI 3.x x-* extension rule and roundtripped
losslessly by the supplied reader/writer.
· A Maven classifier sidecar (<artifact>-jml.jar)
carrying JML stub files, used when in-bytecode embedding
is unsuitable (signed JARs that cannot be re-signed;
specifications too large to fit the per-class budget).
· An empirical evaluation across 39,268 methods of six
real-world Java libraries (synthetic specs) and 22,881 real
inferred specs across the same six libraries' source trees,
showing a 100.0% lossless-roundtrip rate, 4.63­10.20%
bytecode-size overhead, and embedding/reading through-
put high enough to support per-pull-request continuous-
integration workflows.
· A format-optimisation step (single packed annotation per
method, default-omission for assignable \nothing,
and a twelve-token dictionary for common JML constructs)
that reduces byte overhead by 31% on real inference and
48­55% on the synthetic corpora over the initial per-
clause-annotation format.
· A negative test confirming that classes embedded with
@JmlSpec load correctly in Java Virtual Machines that
have no awareness of the annotation type.
Paper organisation. The remainder of the paper is structured
as follows. Section II reviews the existing channels for shipping
specifications alongside compiled Java code and the gap each
of them leaves. Section III presents the format design -- the
annotation type, the canonical-form printer, and the OpenAPI
extension schema. Section IV describes the implementation.
Section V reports the empirical validation. Section VI discusses
generalisability; Section VII the threats to validity. Section VIII
surveys related work and Section IX concludes.
II. BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
Source-level JML specifications are well established: the
language [3], [4] and its checker [5] have a thirty-year history,
and recent inference work [1] produces them at scale. The gap
we address is downstream of inference: once a specification is
known for a method, how does it travel to the consumer that
needs it?
Three transport mechanisms predate this work, none of them
sufficient on its own.
a) JML stub files.: Files of the form <class>.jml
or <class>.refines-jml carry signatures and clauses
without bodies. OpenJML reads stubs natively; nothing else
in the standard Java ecosystem does. A stub file must travel
separately from the JAR (a sibling artefact, a Maven classifier,
or a path entry). For projects that already use OpenJML, stubs
are the right artefact; for projects that consume specifications
from anywhere else -- IDEs, test generators, runtime checkers
-- stubs are invisible.
b) Annotations.: The Java annotation mechanism
(JLS §9.6) is the standard channel for metadata, but the existing
annotations cover only fragments of what specifications need.
JSR-305 captured nullability (@Nullable, @NotNull) and
was withdrawn before final standardisation; the surviving infor-
mal usage covers only nullability. The Checker Framework's
annotations are type-system-shaped and do not generalise
to \sum, \forall, or relational postconditions. JSR-308's
pluggable type system extended where annotations may appear
but did not extend what they may say. The result is a partial
channel: annotations survive the toolchain, but the existing
vocabulary is too thin.
c) Class-file attributes.: JVMS §4.7.1 permits vendor-
defined class-file attributes. A custom attribute could carry
arbitrary structured content, and class loaders ignore unrecog-
nised attributes. The cost is invisibility: standard reflection
does not surface custom attributes, IDEs do not display
them, ProGuard/R8 strip them by default, and javap requires
-private -v to even mention them. A custom attribute is
a write-only channel for any consumer that does not adopt a
custom reader.
d) REST API descriptions.: At service boundaries, Ope-
nAPI 3.x and gRPC's protobuf carry a complementary class of
metadata. OpenAPI permits arbitrary x-* extension properties;
gRPC has no comparable extension point but supports custom
Protobuf annotations. Neither standard says anything about
preconditions or postconditions; they describe the wire format,
not the contract.
e) The carrier we propose.: A runtime-retained annotation
type (@JmlSpecs, carrying every clause kind as a separate
String[] member of a single annotation per method) plus
an OpenAPI extension family (x-jml-*) covers the gap.
The annotation is read by reflection, by ASM, and by javap;
the OpenAPI extension is preserved by the standard parsers;
both survive the Maven and Gradle ecosystems unmodified.
Section III specifies the format precisely; Section IV describes
our embedder/extractor implementation; Section V reports the
empirical evaluation.
III. FORMAT DESIGN
Our format design is the contract between the embedder
and any future consumer. It must be precise enough that
an alternative embedder or reader can be written from the
specification alone.
A. The @JmlSpecs Annotation Type
package com.jml.spec;
@Retention(RetentionPolicy.RUNTIME)
@Target({ElementType.METHOD, ElementType.CONSTRUCTOR,
ElementType.FIELD, ElementType.TYPE})
public @interface JmlSpecs {
String[] requires() default {};
String[] ensures() default {};
String[] assignable() default {};
String[] loopInvariant() default {};
/** Each entry is "ExceptionType|condition". */
String[] signals() default {};
String version() default "2";
}
A single annotation per method carries every clause kind
as a separate String[] member. Within a member, order
is the array order; requires clauses are emitted in source
order, which is load-bearing for well-definedness chains (a
precondition asserting an array element's value depends on
earlier preconditions establishing the array's non-null and
the index's in-bounds). Across members, the writer fixes
a canonical declaration order -- requires, ensures,
assignable, loopInvariant, signals, version --
so two writers that follow this format produce byte-identical
annotation entries for the same logical specification (the JVM
annotation format itself does not constrain member order,
JVMS §4.7.16). Unrecognised members are skipped, preserving
forward compatibility for new clause kinds.
a) Default-omission convention.: The assignable
member is omitted when its only entry is \nothing; an absent
assignable is interpreted as \nothing. This convention
exploits a strong empirical regularity (100% of specs in our
corpus carry assignable \nothing, the inferrer's default
for pure-looking methods) and removes one array entry per
spec. A spec that does have non-default assignable clauses lists
them explicitly.
b) Token-encoded clause strings.: Clause text strings are
encoded before being written to the constant pool. A twelve-
entry dictionary substitutes common JML tokens (\result,
\old(, \forall, \exists, \sum, \product, \num_of,
==> , != null, == null, \nothing, \everything)
with single Unicode control bytes (U+0001 through U+0011).
Twelve is the empirical sweet spot: every token in the dictionary
represents at least 0.5% of corpus bytes on the real-inference
corpus, and a learned-dictionary experiment that grows the
dictionary to 28 entries (Section V-F) recovers only a further
0.59 percentage points. The chosen byte values cannot appear
in legitimate JML source, so substitution is unambiguous
and invertible. UTF-8 encodes each token byte as a single
byte, so each occurrence saves token-length - 1 bytes. The
reader decodes on read; consumers that do not know about
the dictionary will see the control characters and can either
decode using the published table or fall back to the sidecar
(Section III).
c) Backward and forward compatibility.: A predeces-
sor format (v1) used Java's repeatable-annotation mecha-
nism: one @JmlSpec per clause with per-clause kind
/ text / order / version members, wrapped in
@JmlSpecs(value={...}). The current reader accepts
both shapes, so JARs embedded against the predecessor format
continue to load. Only the current format (v2) is emitted by the
writer. Section V-F reports the empirical impact of the v1v2
change. The forward-compatibility policy is symmetric to JLS
§9.6 on annotation evolution: unknown annotation members
are skipped by the reader, and token bytes that a future writer
adds but a current reader does not know about pass through as
control characters (and remain decodable by any consumer that
holds the published dictionary). New clause kinds can therefore
be added without breaking older readers; new dictionary entries
are similarly additive.
d) Synthetic carriers.: Lambdas, method references,
anonymous inner classes, and record accessors compile to
synthetic methods or classes; the embedder writes specifications
to the synthetic carrier under its bytecode descriptor.
B. Canonical Form
To support roundtrip equality at the byte level, clause text
is canonicalised before emission. Whitespace runs collapse to
single spaces; no spaces around . or ::; single space around
binary operators (+, -, *, /, %, comparison, logical); no space
inside parentheses or brackets; => and <=> are normalised to
the long forms ==> and <==>. Quantifier headers retain their
bound-variable names; alpha-renaming is deferred to a future
release and currently a no-op.
The canonicaliser is explicitly lexical: it does not perform
semantic equivalence. Two clauses that differ in operand order
(a > b vs b < a) remain distinct strings, and roundtrip equality
is preserved on the wire form rather than on a normalised
theory level. Semantic equivalence would silently rewrite valid
specifications during transit, which is unsuitable when the
embedder's job is to carry data faithfully.
C. The OpenAPI Extension
paths:
/orders/{id}:
get:
x-jml-requires:
- "id != null"
- "id > 0"
x-jml-ensures:
- "\\result != null ==> \\result.id == id"
x-jml-assignable:
- "\\nothing"
x-jml-signals:
- exception: NotFoundException
condition: "id > 0 && !exists(id)"
Each extension key is an array of canonical-form strings.
x-jml-requires preserves order; the others are un-
ordered. x-jml-signals is an array of {exception,
condition} objects; exception types are JVM internal names
so cross-language consumers can resolve them.
A JSON Schema document accompanies the artefact and
may be used to validate any OpenAPI document independently
of the inferrer. When the OpenAPI document is generated by
the framework (springdoc-openapi, JAX-RS) and not editable,
a sidecar JSON file (<service>.contract.json) carries
the same content keyed by route and verb.
Source code
Inferrer
(predecessor)
Method-
Specification
InferrerSpec-
Converter
MethodSpec
AsmJmlSpec-
Writer
(+codec,
canonicaliser)
Embedded
JAR
AsmJmlSpec-
Reader
(+codec)
Map<MethodKey,
MethodSpec>
Fig. 1. Embedder data flow. The predecessor inferrer (dashed) produces
a MethodSpecification; InferrerSpecConverter translates it to
the embedder's MethodSpec record; AsmJmlSpecWriter (with the codec
and canonicaliser) emits an annotated JAR; AsmJmlSpecReader recovers
the original MethodSpec map. The three core classes described in the
subsections below are shaded blue.
D. Sidecar JAR
For specifications that exceed the per-class bytecode budget
(the JVM constant-pool cap is 65,535 entries per class,
JVMS §4.4; in practice we have not observed a class approach
this limit in any of the three libraries reported), and for signed
JARs that cannot be re-signed, the embedder emits a parallel
artefact with Maven classifier -jml. The sidecar contains
JML stub files (<class>.jmlspec) keyed by class internal
name and a manifest entry recording the source JAR's SHA-256
hash so consumers can detect drift. Stub files are the format
OpenJML reads natively, so the sidecar is consumable by the
verifier without further transformation.
IV. IMPLEMENTATION
We implement the embedder in Java 21, using ASM 9.7 for
class-file rewriting. The module com.jml:jml-embedder
is approximately 1,800 source lines of code at the version
tagged in our replication package, of which roughly 1,000 are
in the three core classes described below; the remainder cover
the codec, the OpenAPI extension reader/writer, an automated
dictionary learner used in Section V-F, and small data records.
The module depends only on ASM, Gson, and SLF4J. Figure 1
shows the data flow.
A. AsmJmlSpecWriter
Our writer accepts either a single class file (as byte[])
or a JAR (as Path). For a JAR, it walks each .class
entry, applies a ClassReader  ClassVisitor 
ClassWriter pipeline that intercepts visitMethod calls,
and emits a single @JmlSpecs annotation per method with
each clause kind as a String[] member. Order within each
kind is preserved by array order. Clause strings are encoded via
the SpecCodec dictionary (Section III) before being written;
the default assignable \nothing member is omitted.
Methods without a corresponding MethodSpec are passed
through unchanged.
For specifications that exceed the per-class bytecode budget
or for JARs that must remain unmodified, the writer also
produces a sidecar JAR per Section III. The sidecar's JML stub
files are generated by a small printer that decodes JVM method
descriptors back into source-level types (with array dimensions,
parameterised generic erasure, and primitive types).
B. AsmJmlSpecReader
Our reader is symmetric: it walks each .class entry
with a ClassReader configured to skip code, debug, and
frames (it needs only the annotations) and accumulates a
Map<MethodKey, MethodSpec>. It accepts both the cur-
rent v2 shape (a single @JmlSpecs with array members per
clause kind) and the legacy v1 shape (repeated @JmlSpec
annotations with per-clause kind/text/order metadata,
optionally wrapped in @JmlSpecs(value={...})). For
v2, clause strings are decoded via SpecCodec, and a missing
assignable member is synthesised as [\nothing].
C. JmlCanonicaliser
Our canonicaliser implements the rules of Section III. It
tokenises the clause text using a small lexer (identifiers,
numeric literals, multi-character operators, JML backslash-
keywords) and re-emits the tokens with canonical spacing. The
implementation is 260 source lines and we validate it with 16
test cases covering whitespace collapsing, operator spelling,
parenthesisation, and idempotency.
D. Pipeline Integration
We integrate the embedder with the inferrer via a small
bridge class, InferrerSpecConverter, that translates the
inferrer's MethodSpecification model to the embedder's
MethodSpec record. The conversion is byte-for-byte exact
and preserves clause-list order; we invoke canonicalisation
separately when needed. With the converter in place, the end-
to-end pipeline is one method call:
MethodSpecification inferred = new
MethodSpecificationInferrer()
.inferSpecification(method);
MethodSpec embeddable =
InferrerSpecConverter.toEmbeddable(inferred);
new AsmJmlSpecWriter().embedJar(input, output,
Map.of(methodKey, embeddable));
The roundtrip property extract(embed(infer(
source))) == infer(source) is exercised by a
JUnit suite (InferrerToEmbedderRoundtripTest) at
small scale and at corpus scale by the validation harness of
Section V.
V. EMPIRICAL VALIDATION
We evaluate the embedder on real-world Java libraries.
Our harness applies the embedder to each library's JAR file,
generates a synthetic specification per method (one requires
clause per non-primitive parameter, one ensures clause
for reference returns, and assignable \nothing), and
measures four quantities: lossless-roundtrip rate, bytecode-size
overhead, embedding throughput, and reading throughput.
A. Subjects
Six libraries are reported: Apache Commons Lang 3.14.0,
Apache Commons IO 2.13.0, Apache Commons Math 3.6.1,
Guava 33.3.0-jre, jOOL 0.9.14, and Vavr 0.10.4. Commons
Lang is the same subject used by the predecessor inference pa-
per [1]; Commons IO contributes a different shape (file/stream
utility classes with significant abstract-method counts); Com-
mons Math adds numerical-utility code; Guava is selected as a
larger contrast with more complex use of generics and a multi-
release JAR; jOOL and Vavr contribute functional-programming
idioms (heavy use of generic interfaces, default methods, and
lambdas). Together the six libraries cover 39,268 methods. The
remaining four libraries identified in the predecessor protocol
(jsoup, JFreeChart, JUnit, AssertJ) are deferred to a follow-up
validation; the validation harness fires uniformly across all
reported libraries, so the additional libraries are mechanical to
validate.
B. Method
For each library:
1) Walk every .class entry; collect method signatures,
excluding bridge, synthetic, and class-initialiser methods.
2) Generate a synthetic MethodSpec per method as above.
3) Embed the spec map into a copy of the JAR using
AsmJmlSpecWriter, recording wall time.
4) Read the embedded JAR back using
AsmJmlSpecReader, recording wall time
and matching specs against the originals on
(internalName, methodName, descriptor)
keys.
5) Compute the lossless-roundtrip rate (matched / total),
byte overhead (embedded / original - 1), and throughput
(methods / wall time).
The original and embedded JAR sizes used for the over-
head calculation are on-disk file sizes (Files.size) of
the JAR archive as written by JarOutputStream at its
default compression level. Both numerator and denominator
are therefore measured after the DEFLATE compression that
the .jar container applies to class-file entries; the reported
overhead percentages already account for any constant-pool
string redundancy that the compressor can exploit.
A separate negative test loads an embedded class
via a URLClassLoader rooted only at the embedded
JAR (with the platform class loader as parent) and con-
firms that Class.forName succeeds. The annotation
type com.jml.spec.JmlSpec is not on this loader's
classpath; reflective annotation access is allowed to raise
TypeNotPresentException but class load itself must
not fail.
C. Results
Table I reports the headline measurements. Method counts,
lossless-roundtrip rate, and bytecode-size overhead are deter-
ministic; we report each exactly once. Embedding and reading
throughput vary across runs (JIT warm-up, garbage collection,
OS scheduling); we report the median across 39 independent
runs of the harness per library, with the observed ranges
discussed in the Throughput paragraph below.
D. Analysis
a) Lossless roundtrip.: All six libraries achieve
a 100.0% lossless-roundtrip rate. An earlier prototype
of the embedder reported 96.9% / 97.6% on Com-
mons Lang and Guava owing to a missed callback
in the writer's MethodVisitor lifecycle: lazy emis-
sion was triggered by visitCode, visitParameter,
visitAnnotationDefault, or visitAnnotation,
but none of these hooks fires for abstract / interface methods,
which only invoke visitEnd. Adding visitEnd to the
trigger set closes the gap. Every method on every interface
in all six libraries now receives the embedded annotation.
Commons IO has a noticeably higher proportion of interfaces,
which is the reason its byte-overhead percentage runs higher
than the others under both v1 and v2 (Table III); the prototype
gap would also have been worst on Commons IO.
b) Byte overhead.: The synthetic-spec overhead sits in the
4.80­6.97% range across the six libraries. The differences are
explained by structural shape rather than total size: Commons
IO has the highest proportion of interfaces (each of which
receives a clause set per method), pushing its overhead
percentage above the others; jOOL has the lowest, consistent
with its smaller per-class method counts and concentration
of functional-interface declarations whose method shapes are
simple. Commons Math, Vavr, and Guava sit in the middle
of the range. The absolute overhead per library is well below
typical Maven distribution sizes (e.g. 38 KB for Commons
Lang, 162 KB for Guava). For libraries where even this cost
is unacceptable, the Maven classifier sidecar (Section III) is
the recommended fallback.
The synthetic figures are not, however, an upper bound on
real overhead. The real-inference run on the same Commons
Lang JAR (Section V-E) measures 10.07% -- 4.22 percentage
points above the synthetic 5.85%. Real inferred specs are
richer than the synthetic worst case: 90.4% have at least one
ensures clause (vs. the one per reference-return synthetic
policy), 11.5% carry one or more loop invariants (the synthetic
harness emits none), 14.8% include branch-conditional implica-
tions, and the average clause string is longer because the inferrer
emits parameter bounds, \result relations, and \old(...)
references that the synthetic policy never produces. A deployer
planning storage budget should provision for the real-inference
figure (around 10% on a typical utility library), not the synthetic-
uniform figure.
c) Throughput.: Synthetic-spec median embedding
throughputs span 12,618­34,138 methods/second (Guava slow-
est, Vavr fastest); reading throughputs span 127,924­333,994
methods/second. Real inference is slower because each spec
carries more clauses (Section V-E): 5,951­14,398 m/s embed-
ding, 68,281­133,762 m/s reading. At the synthetic median
TABLE I
EMBEDDER VALIDATION ON REAL-WORLD LIBRARIES (MEDIANS ACROSS 39 RUNS FOR THROUGHPUT; LOSSLESS-ROUNDTRIP RATE AND OVERHEAD ARE
DETERMINISTIC). THE LOWER BLOCK REPORTS THE FULL INFERREREMBEDDER PIPELINE ON REAL INFERRER-GENERATED SPECIFICATIONS; THE
SYNTHETIC SPECS IN THE UPPER BLOCK ARE DECOUPLED FROM THE INFERRER'S BEHAVIOUR TO ISOLATE THE EMBEDDING MECHANISM. ON MATCHED
METHODS, EQUALITY IS EXACT (ZERO CLAUSE-LEVEL MISMATCHES).
Library Methods Lossless Byte ovhd. Embed (m/s) Read (m/s)
Synthetic specs (isolating the embedding mechanism)
Apache Commons Lang 3.14.0 4,029 100.0% +5.85% 16,225 221,617
Apache Commons IO 2.13.0 2,677 100.0% +6.97% 21,976 327,618
Apache Commons Math 3.6.1 9,191 100.0% +5.19% 20,485 260,593
Guava 33.3.0-jre 13,840 100.0% +5.27% 12,618 127,924
jOOL 0.9.14 3,869 100.0% +4.80% 30,218 226,339
Vavr 0.10.4 5,662 100.0% +5.56% 34,138 333,994
Real inferred specs (full inferrerembedder pipeline)
Apache Commons Lang 3.14.0 2,332 100.0% +10.07% 7,680 78,801
Apache Commons IO 2.13.0 1,680 100.0% +10.20% 10,702 101,218
Apache Commons Math 3.6.1 6,001 100.0% +10.04% 7,595 111,642
Guava 33.3.0-jre 6,320 100.0% +4.63% 5,951 68,281
jOOL 0.9.14 2,648 100.0% +5.81% 13,668 126,159
Vavr 0.10.4 3,900 100.0% +6.39% 14,398 133,762
JML-Inferrer self-test 73 100.0% -- -- --
for Guava, embedding the full 13,840-method JAR takes
roughly 1.1 seconds; under real inference, 2.3 seconds. Reading
is consistently an order of magnitude faster (the reader
skips full class rewriting). Both regimes comfortably support
per-PR-comment continuous-integration workflows. Per-run
distributions across the 39 harness invocations ship with the
replication package.
d) Negative test.: org.apache.commons.lang3.
StringUtils loaded successfully via a URLClassLoader
that does not see com.jml.spec.JmlSpec. Reflective
annotation access either returns the resolvable
annotations (none in this loader's view) or raises
TypeNotPresentException, both documented
behaviours. Class load is unaffected. A corpus-scale
variant (loading every class in every embedded JAR through
the same annotation-blind loader) ships with the replication
package; we do not promote it to the body because JVM
class-loading semantics for unknown annotation types are
deterministic per the JLS.
E. Real-inferred-specs roundtrip on six libraries
The synthetic-spec validation isolates the embedding mech-
anism from the inferrer's behaviour, but does not exercise the
inferrer-to-embedder pipeline on real code. To close that gap,
a second harness (CommonsLangRealInferenceTest)
runs the MethodSpecificationInferrer over every
method in the source jars of all six libraries, resolves the source
signatures against each binary JAR's bytecode descriptors by
name and parameter count, embeds the resulting MethodSpec
entries via AsmJmlSpecWriter, reads them back via
AsmJmlSpecReader, and checks clause-list equality.
Across the six libraries the harness processes 2,339 source
files containing 32,459 source method declarations. The source-
to-bytecode key resolution places 22,881 specs into distinct
keys (1,680 Commons IO + 2,332 Commons Lang + 6,001
Commons Math + 6,320 Guava + 2,648 jOOL + 3,900 Vavr),
and every one of them roundtrips with byte-for-byte equality on
its clause list: matched = total, zero missing, zero mismatches
in every library (Table I).
The real-inference byte-overhead figures sit at 4.63%­10.20%
across the six libraries. The Apache libraries (Lang 10.07%, IO
10.20%, Math 10.04%) cluster at the upper end because real
specs are richer than the synthetic worst case (more clauses per
method, more diverse content, more long-tail expressions that
the dictionary does not cover). The functional-programming
libraries (jOOL 5.81%, Vavr 6.39%) and Guava (4.63%) sit
lower: Guava has large generic-heavy classes with dense
bodies, jOOL and Vavr concentrate small functional-interface
methods, so the same per-spec byte cost amortises against
larger denominators. Embedding throughput is 6,000­14,000
methods/second under real specs (vs. 12,000­34,000 under syn-
thetic) and reading throughput 68,000­134,000 methods/second;
both remain comfortably inside per-PR continuous-integration
budgets.
A residual of source-method-to-bytecode-descriptor lookups
fails on overload collisions where two source overloads of the
same name and arity map to the same bytecode descriptor
(an artefact of erased generics and the harness's first-match-
wins choice). Roughly one quarter of inferred-with-clauses
methods are lost this way on Commons Lang, less on the
other two libraries. The 100% lossless rate is on every spec
the harness successfully embeds; a full type-resolving harness
would recover the residual without changing the embedder's
behaviour.
a) Spec-shape coverage.: The real-inference corpus exer-
cises every JML construct the embedder is required to transport.
Table II reports the distribution.
Per-library shape proportions vary as expected: Commons
Math has the highest loop-invariant share (20.9%) and quantifier
share (3.8%); jOOL and Vavr have the highest ensures-
TABLE II
SPEC-SHAPE COVERAGE AGGREGATED ACROSS ALL SIX LIBRARIES' 22,881
REAL-INFERENCE SPECS. PER-LIBRARY BREAKDOWNS APPEAR IN THE
REPLICATION PACKAGE. EVERY CATEGORY ROUNDTRIPS LOSSLESSLY ON
EVERY LIBRARY.
Construct Specs % of corpus
requires clauses 9,734 42.5%
ensures clauses 20,601 90.0%
assignable clauses 22,881 100.0%
loop_invariant clauses 2,458 10.7%
Quantifiers (\forall, \exists, \sum) 312 1.4%
\old references 411 1.8%
\result references 15,809 69.1%
Branch-conditional (==>) 1,958 8.6%
clause shares (97.7%, 99.3%) and the lowest loop-invariant
shares; Commons IO has the lowest ensures share (76.3%,
dominated by void stream utilities). Despite this variation, every
category roundtrips losslessly across all six libraries, so the
embedder transports not only simple null-check preconditions
but also nested quantifiers, \old references, conditional impli-
cations, and loop invariants. The 73-method self-test on the in-
ferrer's own source code (CorpusLevelRoundtripTest)
supplements this with an end-to-end check on a smaller and
stylistically different corpus; it also achieves a 100% lossless-
roundtrip rate.
F. Format optimisation impact
An earlier version of the embedding format (v1) used Java's
repeatable-annotation mechanism: each JML clause produced
a separate @JmlSpec annotation, with a per-clause kind
enum, text string, order integer, and version string, all
wrapped in a @JmlSpecs(value={...}) container. This
is the maximally verbose annotation shape and produced 11.76­
13.49% overhead on the synthetic-spec corpora and 14.70%
on the real-inference Commons Lang run.
The current format (v2, used to produce every other number
in this section) applies three changes:
1) Single annotation per method. A single @JmlSpecs
annotation now carries every clause kind as a sep-
arate String[] member (requires, ensures,
assignable, loopInvariant, signals). This
eliminates the per-clause annotation framing (type refer-
ence, element-value-pair structure, end marker) that v1
paid for every JML clause.
2) Default-omission for assignable \nothing. 100%
of inferred specs in our corpus carry assignable
\nothing; the v2 convention is that absence means
\nothing, so the writer omits the member entirely.
The reader synthesises it on read. Every spec saves one
annotation-array entry.
3) Token dictionary. Twelve common JML tokens
(\result, \old(, \forall, \exists, \sum,
\product, \num_of, ==> , != null, == null,
\nothing, \everything) are replaced by single Uni-
code control-character bytes (U+0001 to U+0011) before
being written, and decoded on read. The token bytes
are control characters that cannot appear in legitimate
JML, so the substitution is unambiguous and invertible.
UTF-8 encodes each token byte as a single byte, so
each occurrence saves token-length - 1 bytes in the
constant-pool UTF-8 entry.
Table III reports the impact. The lossless-roundtrip property
is preserved at 100% on every corpus.
TABLE III
FORMAT-OPTIMISATION IMPACT ON BYTECODE-SIZE OVERHEAD. THE
LOSSLESS-ROUNDTRIP RATE IS 100% UNDER BOTH FORMATS.
Corpus v1 ovhd. v2 ovhd. Reduction
Synthetic -- Commons Lang 11.95% 5.85% -51%
Synthetic -- Commons IO 13.49% 6.97% -48%
Synthetic -- Guava 11.76% 5.27% -55%
Real inference -- Commons Lang 14.70% 10.07% -31%
The real-inference rows for Commons IO and Guava (Table I) report only the
v2 figures (10.20% and 4.63% respectively); they were not measured under
v1 because the v1 format was retired before those runs.
The synthetic-spec reduction is larger than the real-inference
reduction because synthetic specs are dominated by exactly the
patterns the optimisation targets: every spec carries the default-
omittable assignable \nothing (optimisation 2), every
requires clause is of the form p != null (optimisation 3
token), and every ensures clause references \result (also
a token). The real-inference corpus contains a wider variety
of clause shapes; many strings still benefit from the dictionary
but a long-tail of arithmetic expressions, range comparisons,
and quantified subexpressions are not covered by the current
twelve tokens. The real-inference reduction is therefore a more
realistic estimate of what a production deployment should
expect.
a) What is empirical about this optimisation.: The choice
of which JML tokens to encode and which clause to declare
a default is not arbitrary: each rests on the shape distribution
measured on the real-inference corpus (Table II). The default-
omission convention exploits the empirical observation that
100% of inferred specs in our corpus carry assignable
\nothing; the token dictionary tracks the top-frequency JML
constructs that the inferrer actually produces. A format designed
without the measurement would have to either (i) include every
JML keyword in the dictionary (paying constant-pool cost for
tokens that never fire) or (ii) omit tokens that occur frequently in
real specs. The synthetic-vs-real divergence (48­55% reduction
vs. 31%) is itself empirical evidence that the saving depends
on which clause shapes the consumer's inferrer produces.
b) Configuration impact and DEFLATE measurement.:
The default-omission and token-dictionary conventions are
exposed to callers through a WriterConfig object. Three
preset configurations and an alternative spec-format mode are
measured in Table IV. Each measurement is taken on the same
2,332-spec Commons Lang real-inference corpus, with the
same reader replaying every spec to assert a 100% lossless-
roundtrip rate in every mode.
TABLE IV
CONFIGURATION SWEEP ON THE COMMONS LANG REAL-INFERENCE
CORPUS (2,332 SPECS). EACH MODE ROUNDTRIPS LOSSLESSLY.
Mode Overhead vs. default
WriterConfig.NONE (no codec) 11.26% +1.19 pp
WriterConfig.JML_INFERRER (default) 10.07% baseline
Learned dictionary (28 tokens) 9.48% -0.59 pp
Compressed v3 (per-spec DEFLATE) 30.25% +20.18 pp
The NONE mode confirms that the default-omission and
token-dictionary conventions together account for the 1.19
percentage points of saving the default mode delivers over
an always-explicit baseline. An inferrer with a different
dominant clause shape (e.g. assignable \everything
as a conservative default, or no default at all) can opt out of
the convention by selecting NONE or by supplying a custom
defaults map; the v1 format remains readable for callers that
prefer not to commit to any convention.
The learned-dictionary mode (an automated dictionary
learner, DictionaryLearner.learn, that greedily picks
the highest-savings substrings from a corpus of inferred specs)
extends the dictionary from 12 to 28 tokens (the byte-budget
cap), and gains a further 0.59 percentage points over the hand-
picked default. The improvement is real but modest: the hand-
picked dictionary already covers the highest-frequency JML
tokens, and the long-tail substrings the learner discovers are
short and not abundant. The result establishes that on the
corpora we tested, hand-picked-good is close to learned-best.
The compressed v3 mode (per-method DEFLATE of the
clause set, stored as a single byte[] annotation member) is
a clear negative result: at +30.25% overhead it is worse than
every other mode by a wide margin. Two effects combine.
First, DEFLATE on inputs of 50­100 bytes (the typical
per-spec payload after token encoding) cannot exploit much
redundancy; the small window leaves the compressor with
little to amortise its overhead against. Second, although the
writer stores packed as a byte[] annotation member, the
JVM class-file format inflates this storage relative to a constant-
pool UTF-8 string of the same byte length, and the per-spec
compressed payloads are unique enough that the constant-
pool deduplication v2 enjoys is unavailable. A corpus-level
DEFLATE (a single class-file attribute containing all of a
class's specs, compressed once) would likely fare better, but is
incompatible with per-method annotation access. We retain v3
as an opt-in mode for completeness; we do not recommend it
as the default.
The v1 format remains readable; the reader supports both
shapes so embedded JARs produced before the format change
continue to load.
G. Threats specific to this measurement
· Six libraries plus self-test, not the predecessor protocol's
full ten external libraries. The lossless-roundtrip analysis
above identifies the residual risks (interface methods,
multi-release JARs); on libraries that exercise either pattern
the embedder reaches 100%. The follow-up validation
against the remaining four libraries (jsoup, JFreeChart,
JUnit, AssertJ) is mechanical.
· JDK 21 only. Older JDKs (8, 11, 17) and ahead-of-
time compilers (GraalVM native-image) are deferred.
The class files emitted by Commons Lang target Java 8,
so the runtime-side validation should generalise without
modification.
· Source-to-bytecode key resolution is name+arity only.
917 of the 3,249 inferred-with-clauses Commons Lang
methods are lost to overload collisions where two source
methods of the same name and parameter count map to
the same bytecode descriptor under our harness's first-
match heuristic. A full type-resolving harness (parsing
each source parameter's Java type and converting to its
JVM descriptor) would close this gap; the present harness
already demonstrates 100% lossless roundtrip on every
spec it embeds, so the residual is a measurement limitation
rather than an embedder limitation.
VI. DISCUSSION
A. Why an annotation, not a class-file attribute?
Custom class-file attributes (JVMS §4.7.1) are a tempting
alternative: they avoid the constant-pool pollution of large string
literals and they are technically the more general mechanism.
Three reasons argue against them in practice:
· Tool visibility. Standard reflection ignores custom at-
tributes. IDEs do not display them. ProGuard and R8
strip unrecognised attributes by default unless explicitly
listed. Each downstream consumer would need a custom
reader.
· Repeatable annotations are no longer onerous. Java 8's
repeatable-annotation mechanism makes per-clause emis-
sion straightforward. The historical reason to prefer a
custom attribute -- avoiding one annotation per clause
being emitted with a verbose container -- is no longer
compelling.
· Forward compatibility. An annotation-based carrier with a
Kind enum allows new clause kinds to be added without
breaking existing readers. A custom attribute's binary
layout is harder to evolve compatibly.
We therefore recommend the annotation carrier as the
primary form. The custom-attribute alternative remains usable
for cases where the annotation is unsuitable (signed JARs,
aggressive obfuscation), and our sidecar JAR fills the same
gap with even less coupling to the bytecode.
B. Generality
Our format design is independent of the inferrer that
produces the specifications. Any source of JML clauses -- the
inferrer of [1], Daikon [6], hand-written contracts, contracts
produced by a future LLM-assisted refinement step -- can be
embedded by the same mechanism. The format also generalises
to languages other than Java that target the JVM (Kotlin,
Scala) at the cost of those languages providing their own
translators between source-level annotations and the bytecode
@JmlSpecs representation.
For non-JVM languages, the OpenAPI extension carries
equivalent information at the service boundary. The bytecode
side is JVM-specific; the service-boundary side is language-
agnostic.
C. Limitations
The embedder is consumer-tolerant but the consumer has
work to do. A reader that wants to act on the embedded
clauses must (a) parse the canonical-form JML strings, (b)
substitute parameter names, and (c) decide what to do with
the result. We ship the writer, the reader, and the canonicaliser,
but we do not ship a verifier or a runtime checker -- those are
downstream concerns that benefit from the work here without
being implemented by it.
We note one substantive limitation: roundtrip equality is
on the canonical-form string, not on a normalised semantic
theory, so equivalent specifications written in different forms
will appear distinct on the wire. We chose this separation of
concerns deliberately in Section III; semantic normalisation is
a separable layer.
VII. THREATS TO VALIDITY
a) Internal validity.: The 100% lossless-roundtrip rate
depends on the writer covering every method shape that ASM
emits. An earlier prototype reported 96.9% / 97.6% because lazy
emission was triggered by visitCode, visitParameter,
visitAnnotationDefault, or visitAnnotation,
but none of these hooks fires for abstract / interface methods,
which only invoke visitEnd. Adding visitEnd to the
trigger set closed the gap. The expanded six-library corpus
exercises functional-programming idioms (jOOL, Vavr) and
numerical-utility code (Commons Math) in addition to the
original three; the embedder reaches 100% on every category.
The same risk pattern applies to method shapes specific to
future JVM features -- e.g., abstract record components, hidden
classes (JEP 371) -- which would need their own triggers if
they exhibit different visit-call orderings. The mitigation is the
same: a corpus-scale validation per JVM release.
The byte-overhead figures are deterministic given the JAR
and the spec map. The 5.27­6.97% synthetic range and
10.07% real-inference figure are exact for the inputs reported;
replication on the same JARs reproduces these numbers byte-
for-byte. Throughput figures vary across runs because of just-in-
time (JIT) compilation, garbage-collection (GC) pauses, and OS
scheduling; the medians in Table I were collected on a single
platform (OpenJDK 21 with default G1GC on a Windows 11
workstation, no concurrent load) and across 39 independent
harness invocations per library. We did not perform a formal
power analysis on the run count; the replication package ships
the raw per-run numbers so that any reader can recompute
alternative statistics or distribution summaries. Cross-platform
replication (different JDK, different OS, ARM hardware) is
identified as follow-up work.
b) External validity.: The six libraries reported (Apache
Commons Lang, Apache Commons IO, Apache Commons
Math, Guava, jOOL, Vavr) are mature, well-structured, and
ship through Maven Central. Generalisation to less-tidy code
(older artefacts, vendored dependencies, hand-tuned ProGuard-
stripped JARs) will need separate validation. The negative
test confirms that the consumer-side contract (load classes
without the annotation type) holds at JDK 21; older JDKs
(8, 11, 17) and ahead-of-time compilation paths (GraalVM
native-image) are deferred.
The real-inference validation covers all six libraries (1,680 +
2,332 + 6,001 + 6,320 + 2,648 + 3,900 = 22,881 specs in total);
the cross-corpus generalisation question for the embedder's
lossless-roundtrip claim is settled across the reported real-
inference corpus. The shape distribution in Table II aggregates
over the full six-library corpus; per-library breakdowns are pro-
vided in the replication package and show similar proportions,
with Commons Math contributing the highest loop-invariant
share and the functional-programming libraries (jOOL, Vavr)
the lowest.
The OpenAPI extension is validated empirically against
the canonical OpenAPI 3.x parser, swagger-parser 2.1.x:
the SwaggerParserRoundtripTest JUnit suite parses a
document carrying every x-jml-* extension key (requires,
ensures, assignable, loopInvariant, signals) and asserts that the
in-memory model exposes each extension on the operation
object with key names and value lists preserved, including
the signals clause's nested {exception, condition}
object structure. The extension is also exercised by the
OpenApiJmlExtensionTest JUnit suite, which reads and
writes x-jml-* properties on a wider set of constructed
documents (single operation, multi-verb paths, sidecar JSON
form) and asserts roundtrip equality. The OpenAPI 3.x speci-
fication (§ 3.9) requires x-* preservation; our test confirms
swagger-parser, the reference Java implementation, honours
that requirement for this extension family. End-to-end empirical
validation against openapi-generator and a real microser-
vice's emitted OpenAPI document is part of the planned follow-
up evaluation but does not appear in the present paper.
c) Construct validity.: The lossless-roundtrip metric
is operationalised as set-equality on (internalName,
methodName, descriptor) keys, with byte-for-byte
clause-list equality on each matched key. Two methods with
identical signatures but different bytecode bodies (for example,
the same constructor compiled with different optimisation
levels) appear identical to the harness. This is the right construct
for the embedder's job -- the embedder carries metadata, not
bytecode -- but a reader that needs to attach annotations to
a specific compilation of a method would need additional
disambiguation.
The real-inference harness resolves source methods to
bytecode descriptors by name and parameter count; this loses
information on overload pairs of the same arity, costing 917
of the 3,249 inferred-with-clauses methods in our run. A full
type-resolving harness would close this gap; the present harness
already demonstrates 100% lossless roundtrip on every spec
it embeds, so the residual is a measurement limitation rather
than an embedder defect.
d) Conclusion validity.: The empirical claims are point
measurements on six libraries (both synthetic specs and real-
inference specs); no statistical significance test is meaningful
for measurements of this kind (the byte-overhead figures are
deterministic; the throughput figures are reported as medians
across 39 runs to control for run-to-run variability). The
conclusions hold for the JARs and spec sets reported and the
relevant generalisation question is breadth (more libraries, more
JDK versions) rather than statistical inference. The predecessor
protocol's full ten-library validation is identified as follow-up
work.
VIII. RELATED WORK
a) Specification languages.: JML [3], [4] provides the
contract vocabulary we transport. Eiffel's design-by-contract [2]
originated the broader approach; Spec# [7] ported it to .NET.
None of these languages address the distribution problem we
tackle -- they assume the consumer has source.
b) Specification inference.: The inference engine of [1]
is the work whose outputs the present paper takes as input.
Daikon [6] infers likely invariants from execution traces;
Houdini [8] and its descendants infer candidate annotations
and discharge them through a verifier. PreInfer [9] uses
dynamic symbolic execution. Jdoctor [10] extracts exception
preconditions from Javadoc. None of these systems address
what happens to the inferred specifications after they are
produced; we provide the missing distribution layer.
c) Annotation-based contracts.: JSR-305 captured nul-
lability annotations and was withdrawn before final standard-
isation; the surviving informal usage covers only nullability.
The Checker Framework [11]'s annotation vocabulary is type-
system-shaped and does not generalise to the relational and
quantified clauses JML supports, and the underlying JSR-308
type-annotations specification [12] extends where annotations
may appear but not what they may say. Cofoja (Contracts for
Java) emits runtime checks from @Requires/@Ensures an-
notations but does not survive without its annotation processor
on the classpath; our work is consumer-tolerant by design.
d) Bytecode metadata transport.: ASM [13] is the
standard library for class-file rewriting and underpins our
embedder. Byte Buddy [14] and Javassist [15] provide higher-
level APIs over similar primitives, while Soot [16] sits on the
analysis side of the same primitive. AspectJ [17] pioneered
the use of runtime-retained annotations as advice carriers
at the bytecode level; our @JmlSpecs carrier follows the
same pattern (runtime retention, consumer-tolerant load) for a
different payload (logical contracts, not advice). None of these
libraries prescribe a metadata format for specifications -- they
are mechanism, not policy. JEP 181 (nest-mates) and JEP 371
(hidden classes) extend what the JVM accepts as class-file
content but do not change the annotation channel.
e) API description.: OpenAPI 3.x [18] is the standard
for HTTP service descriptions; gRPC's .proto files cover
RPC. Pact [19] captures consumer-driven contracts as example
interactions; it is example-based rather than logical, so it is a
transport for examples rather than for specifications, and we
specifically reject example-based encoding (Section III). The
OpenAPI extension we propose is the smallest viable addition to
an existing widely deployed format, and survives the reference
parser swagger-parser [20] unchanged (Section V).
f) Generating OpenAPI from source.: Recent work on gen-
erating OpenAPI descriptions from Java bytecode and source
code includes Respector, Prophet, and AutoOAS [21], which
extract REST endpoint metadata from Spring Boot applications.
These approaches generate the OpenAPI description itself; our
x-jml-* extension is orthogonal to that work -- it augments
an OpenAPI description with logical contracts, regardless of
how the description was produced.
g) Mutation testing and LLM-driven test generation.: The
mutation-testing literature is cited in detail in [1]. A growing
body of work uses LLMs to generate test oracles and unit
tests from signatures and natural-language context [22]­[27],
and a parallel thread evaluates whether LLMs can infer formal
postconditions or contracts directly [28]­[31]. The relationship
to the present paper is orthogonal but composable: those works
measure or improve what the model produces; we make the
specifications produced by an inferrer (or, in principle, by such
an LLM) transportable to any consumer that does not have the
source.
IX. CONCLUSION
Automatically inferred JML specifications can be embedded
in compiled Java artefacts and REST API descriptions without
loss: a runtime-retained annotation @JmlSpecs written by an
ASM-based embedder, plus a parallel OpenAPI 3.x extension
family (x-jml-*). Roundtrip is lossless on six libraries
totalling 39,268 methods (synthetic) and on 22,881 real-
inferred specs across the same six libraries' source trees;
overhead is 4.63­10.20% on real inferred specs after the format-
optimisation step (Section V-F, a 31% reduction over the v1 per-
clause format on the measured corpus); the OpenAPI extension
is preserved unchanged by swagger-parser 2.1.x; and
embedded classes load correctly in JVMs without the annotation
type. With the inference engine of [1], the path from source
code to consumer-accessible contract is complete. Follow-
up threads include validation on the four remaining protocol
libraries (jsoup, JFreeChart, JUnit, AssertJ), integration with
the LLM-based test generator of [1], and extending inference
to compose specifications across method boundaries -- with
this carrier transporting the composition.
REFERENCES
[1] Anonymous, "Do specifications help LLMs write better unit tests? an
empirical study of specification-guided test generation with heuristically
inferred JML," 2026, manuscript under review; replication package
available from an anonymous archive during the review period.
[2] B. Meyer, "Applying "design by contract"," Computer, vol. 25, no. 10,
pp. 40­51, 1992.
[3] G. T. Leavens, A. L. Baker, and C. Ruby, "Preliminary design of JML:
A behavioral interface specification language for Java," ACM SIGSOFT
Software Engineering Notes, vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1­38, 2006.
[4] G. T. Leavens et al., "JML reference manual," http://www.jmlspecs.org,
2013, accessed: 2025-01-15.
[5] D. R. Cok, "OpenJML: Software verification for Java 7 using JML, Open-
JDK, and Eclipse," in 1st Workshop on Formal Integrated Development
Environment (F-IDE), ser. EPTCS, vol. 149, 2014, pp. 79­92.
[6] M. D. Ernst, J. H. Perkins, P. J. Guo, S. McCamant, C. Pacheco, M. S.
Tschantz, and C. Xiao, "The Daikon system for dynamic detection of
likely invariants," Science of Computer Programming, vol. 69, no. 1­3,
pp. 35­45, 2007.
[7] M. Barnett and K. R. M. Leino, "Weakest-precondition of unstructured
programs," in Workshop on Program Analysis for Software Tools and
Engineering (PASTE), 2005, pp. 82­87.
[8] C. Flanagan and K. R. M. Leino, "Houdini, an annotation assistant
for ESC/Java," in International Symposium of Formal Methods Europe
(FME), ser. LNCS, vol. 2021. Springer, 2001, pp. 500­517.
[9] A. Astorga, S. Srisakaokul, X. Xiao, and T. Xie, "PreInfer: Automatic
inference of preconditions via symbolic analysis," in 48th Annual
IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable Systems and Net-
works (DSN). IEEE, 2018, pp. 678­689.
[10] A. Blasi, A. Goffi, K. Kuznetsov, A. Gorla, M. D. Ernst,
M. Pezz`
e, and S. D. Castellanos, "Translating code comments to
procedure specifications," in Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGSOFT
International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis, ser.
ISSTA '18. ACM, Jul. 2018, pp. 242­253. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3213846.3213872
[11] M. M. Papi, M. Ali, T. L. C. Jr., J. H. Perkins, and M. D. Ernst, "Practical
pluggable types for Java," in International Symposium on Software Testing
and Analysis (ISSTA), 2008, pp. 201­212.
[12] M. D. Ernst, "Type annotations specification (JSR 308)," in (Specification),
2017.
[13] OW2 Consortium, "ASM: a Java bytecode manipulation and analysis
framework," https://asm.ow2.io/, 2024, accessed: 2026-05-19.
[14] R. Winterhalter, "Byte Buddy: Runtime code generation for the Java
virtual machine," https://bytebuddy.net/, 2024, accessed: 2026-05-25.
[15] S. Chiba, "Load-time structural reflection in Java," in European Confer-
ence on Object-Oriented Programming (ECOOP), ser. LNCS, vol. 1850.
Springer, 2000, pp. 313­336.
[16] R. Vall´
ee-Rai, P. Co, E. Gagnon, L. Hendren, P. Lam, and V. Sundaresan,
"Soot -- a Java bytecode optimization framework," in Conference of
the Centre for Advanced Studies on Collaborative Research (CASCON).
IBM Press, 1999, pp. 125­135.
[17] G. Kiczales, J. Lamping, A. Mendhekar, C. Maeda, C. Lopes, J.-M.
Loingtier, and J. Irwin, "Aspect-oriented programming," in European
Conference on Object-Oriented Programming (ECOOP), ser. LNCS, vol.
1241. Springer, 1997, pp. 220­242.
[18] OpenAPI Initiative, "OpenAPI specification, version 3.1.0," https://spec
.openapis.org/oas/v3.1.0, 2024, accessed: 2026-05-25.
[19] Pact Foundation, "Pact: consumer-driven contract testing," https://docs.p
act.io/, 2024, accessed: 2026-05-19.
[20] Swagger Codegen Project, "swagger-parser: A parser for OpenAPI
definitions in Java," https://github.com/swagger-api/swagger-parser,
2024, accessed: 2026-05-25.
[21] A. Lercher, C. Macho, C. Bauer, and M. Pinzger, "Generating ac-
curate OpenAPI descriptions from Java source code," arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.23873, 2024.
[22] M. Sch¨
afer, S. Nadi, A. Eghbali, and F. Tip, "An empirical evaluation of
using large language models for automated unit test generation," IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering, vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 85­105, 2024.
[23] C. Lemieux, J. P. Inala, S. K. Lahiri, and S. Sen, "CodaMOSA: Escaping
coverage plateaus in test generation with pre-trained large language
models," in 45th International Conference on Software Engineering
(ICSE), 2023, pp. 919­931.
[24] D. Molinelli, L. D. Grazia, A. Martin-Lopez, M. D. Ernst, and M. Pezz`
e,
"Do LLMs generate useful test oracles? an empirical study with an
unbiased dataset," in 40th IEEE/ACM International Conference on
Automated Software Engineering (ASE), 2025.
[25] S. B. Hossain and M. Dwyer, "TOGLL: Correct and strong test oracle
generation with LLMs," arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.03786, 2024.
[26] G. Wang, Q. Xu, L. Briand, and K. Liu, "Mutation-guided unit test gen-
eration with a large language model," arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.02954,
2025.
[27] C. Foster, A. Gulati, M. Harman, I. Harper, K. Mao, J. Ritchey, H. Robert,
and S. Sengupta, "Mutation-guided LLM-based test generation at Meta,"
in Companion Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference
on the Foundations of Software Engineering (FSE Industry), 2025.
[28] M. Endres, S. Fakhoury, S. Chakraborty, and S. K. Lahiri, "Can large
language models transform natural language intent into formal method
postconditions?" Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering
(PACMSE), vol. 1, no. FSE, pp. 1889­1912, 2024.
[29] C. Richter and H. Wehrheim, "Beyond postconditions: Can large language
models infer formal contracts for automatic software verification?" arXiv
preprint arXiv:2510.12702, 2025.
[30] L. Ma, S. Liu, Y. Li, X. Xie, and L. Bu, "SpecGen: Automated generation
of formal program specifications via large language models," arXiv
preprint arXiv:2401.08807, 2024.
[31] M. Konstantinou, R. Degiovanni, and M. Papadakis, "Do LLMs generate
test oracles that capture the actual or the expected program behaviour?"
arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21136, 2024.
